Ladies and gentlemen,
please welcome Java platform
engineer Scott Adler.
Good afternoon.
So, I'm Scott Adler.
I'm from the Java Platform Classes team.
And today we're going to talk
about the Java Platform and just a
general overview of what's in it.
So what we're going to
actually talk about today.
First is an overview
of the Java 2 platform.
I'm not sure how many of you
are actually familiar with it,
but we're going to talk a
little bit about what's in
the Java 2 platform itself.
Then some of the
Mac OS X integration issues,
things that you can do to actually make
your integration with Mac OS X when
you're doing a Java 2 application,
make that experience better.
We're also going to talk a little
bit about where you can find all
the documentation for this stuff.
And then finally we're going to talk
about the Java 2 Standard edition version
1.4 and the features that are in that
and the things that you'll be able to
take advantage of when we get to 1.4.
So you see this slide a lot.
This is the slide that
is the Apple frameworks,
and...
Java is one of the
frameworks that we have.
Now, there's a little bit of confusion
when people talk about Java.
And this has been from the very
beginning of Java that the word
Java means probably 600 different things.
It means coffee.
It means a language.
It means a framework.
It means the beginning of this weird
language called JavaScript that
has nothing to do with Java.
There's like all these things that
are the meaning of the word Java.
And what we're talking about when we
say frameworks is we're talking about
the Java 2 platform as a framework for
you to use to develop applications.
Java can also be used to
develop applications that are
run using the Cocoa framework.
But that's the Java language.
That's not the Java platform.
So you can use the Java language
to get access to Cocoa.
But what we're going to talk
about is the Java platform itself.
So here's the overview of
what the standard edition is.
So a little before we get into
specifically the standard edition,
we have a bunch of
cross-platform editions.
This is actually the foundation
for all the editions.
We've got the Java language that is
on top of the Hotspot virtual machine,
and then there's the KVM,
which is the tiny little VM that's used,
and there's also a card VM.
So starting on your right,
There's the Java Card Edition,
which is this tiny little VM that
runs on top of smart cards.
Then next we have the Micro Edition,
which is a VM that runs inside
of lots of household appliances,
your cell phones.
If you're in Japan, you have a G3 phone.
It's usually running something
on the Micro Edition.
Even I've heard of cases of washers and
dryers that have VMs built into them.
Then we have the Standard edition,
and this is where we fit in.
We're actually providing a
Standard edition implementation.
We have been since 10.1.
Actually,
since 10.0 we've been providing it.
And we've also been providing
a Java-- not Java 2,
but a Java Standard edition
on earlier Macs,
too.
And this is so you can
deliver your applications,
and they can be
cross-platform applications.
They just--their applications just run.
And finally there's the
J2 Enterprise edition,
which there's a lot of confusion on
what's actually involved in here.
We actually have an enterprise
product called WebObjects that you've
probably heard a lot about and there
are a lot of good sessions on it.
And that enterprise product does a
lot of the same things that J2EE does.
It actually has many of the same
features and some of them are
directly out of the J2EE spec.
There also are third parties that
have brought their J2EE platforms,
their certified platforms,
to our platform.
So things like Lutris and Primati have
already brought certified J2EE platforms.
And I think Ted Goldstein
mentioned a couple others that
are pure Java implementations,
things like Orion and I can't
remember all the names right
off the top of my head.
But there are a bunch of
J2EE certified platforms.
So they all run on top
of our Standard edition.
So you can use those J2EE platforms
to deliver your enterprise platform.
edition things on top
of our standard edition.
So what exactly is the Standard Edition?
So if we look at the very bottom here,
we're going to start talking about
all the different OS platforms.
And this is just all the
OS platforms that we run on,
that Java runs on.
Mac OS X is right there.
Linux, Windows, Solaris,
and there's other ports
that have happened.
So on top of that,
you have the Java Virtual Machine.
And this is the stuff
that runs Java bytecodes.
So you've got the Hotspot compiler,
you've got the Hotspot Virtual Machine.
They're basically one big thing
that compiles your stuff as needed,
and Hotspot has all these really cool
features built into it to determine when
it's supposed to compile things and keeps
track of how often your routines are run
so that it doesn't waste time compiling
something that's only run like ten times.
On top of that are the core Java APIs.
And these usually correspond
to things like Java.util,
Java.security.
And there's so many APIs in here.
This has been developing for years.
There are utility classes to
let you do things with all your
typical string manipulations,
string tokenizers that are built in.
There's a whole collections framework,
so you don't actually have to
rewrite your B-tree sorting or
your red-black trees or whatever.
You just use the collections framework.
There are tested sorting
algorithms in there.
There's iterators that work on
top of the collections framework.
There's locale support so that
you can actually have resource
bundles for different locales.
There's a whole Java beans framework
that lets you build bean application
components and use them inside of
other applications and use things
like reflection to figure out what's
going on inside of those beans.
There's built-in networking support,
so you can just open up connections,
use print writers.
There's a whole suite of things
you can do just in the core API.
And this is common across
all of the Java platforms.
Then there's a set of integration APIs.
And these are things like RMI,
remote method invocation, JDBC,
which lets you get to
database connectivity,
the Java naming and directory interface,
and then Corba.
So all these are things
that you integrate with your
existing enterprise systems.
And things like RMI you can use to
actually write distributed applications
with just using remote procedure calls.
You don't have to do any funky transport.
That's taken care of for you underneath.
And one of the more important
things for desktop applications
is actually having a UI toolkit.
And if you look at the
top of our UI toolkit,
we have Swing and AWT as the
very top level of the UI toolkit.
Now, AWT, if you don't know about it,
AWT is the Abstract Windowing Toolkit.
And this is a--it's a
platform-independent definition
of all the GUI objects that you
could have on different platforms.
And then what each platform vendor
does is they develop interface elements
that match those specifications.
So it'll be things like a button and
a window and very typical things,
but sort of least common denominator.
And we've implemented those things.
And then Swing is actually what
is called a lightweight framework.
And that is--in Java,
everything is rendered,
and it's more complex controls because
you don't have to worry about the
differences between the platforms.
You can do things like different-looking
buttons than what might be on Mac OS X or
might be on some other platforms.
And it's all done inside of Java,
so it's okay.
You can--you know,
we can handle the rendering.
And all this lives on top of Java 2D.
And if you went to the
graphics session this morning,
Java 2D is this really
robust graphics engine.
It lets you do things
like translucencies,
general paths, strokes on paths,
gradients.
There are just so many
things you can do in Java 2D.
And Swing actually uses Java 2D to
do a lot of their graphics
manipulations and things.
And then we also have things like sound
input methods for internationalized text,
so you can actually get--you know,
get things out of the OS so that people
can enter more complex characters.
And then accessibility,
which is involved with focus management
and all the things you need to do to
use a computer if you're not physically
able to use a mouse or hit the keys.
And you saw some of that in the keynote,
and Java has a lot of that
built in and has a lot--has had
that built in for a long time.
And then at the very top are
Java-specific deployment options.
We'll talk about this a lot
in this whole conference.
Java Web Start and the Java Plugin
are two ways that actually are unique
to Java in the way you can deliver
Java applications and applets.
So that's basically an overview of
the entire Java 2 Standard edition,
the way we ship it now,
and we're going to talk a little
bit about Mac OS X integration.
And the most important thing
about our Mac OS X integration is,
simply put in this slide, is Aqua.
So what we've done is we've spent a lot
of time to get Aqua to look good in Java,
because we want your
Java applications to look just like
every other application on the Mac.
So we have the Mac OS X look for Java.
Of course, all of our AWT peers,
all of our AWT widgets,
and they're called peers,
are already in Aqua,
because a lot of times we're
just using the native windows.
Sometimes we use some of
our own custom things,
but usually we're using
the native windows.
So you get native windows,
you get native menus,
you get native dialogues
and things like that.
Swing itself,
we implemented the... Aqua look and feel.
So Swing has a pluggable look and
feel that you can implement your own.
There's already one that's
a Java look and feel,
which James Galsing was talking
about was designed by bankers,
so we don't like it so much.
And there's a... On other platforms,
you can actually have
specific look and feels,
like on Windows,
there's a Windows look and feel,
which looks just like that.
So if you're on Windows,
you can run that.
And there's a motif look and feel,
so if you want to feel like
you're back in college running
on your X Windows thing,
you can... You can use that.
But we have the Aqua look and feel.
It's on by default.
You can... It just works.
You get it with your applications.
It has things like the
default button is throbbing,
and so when you hit return,
it'll go there,
and all the translucencies just
happen for you automatically.
And then we're using
Quartz 2D for the graphics.
So you actually get all of our
anti-aliasing that's built into Quartz.
You get our font support.
There was some talk about how
we actually support things like
TrueType hinting because that's
built into the Quartz font mechanism.
And that's something that's a new
feature for 1.4 that we already
have in our 1.3 implementation.
So when we talk about actually
more detailed integration,
we've got a couple different categories.
One of them is application-specific.
And application-specific
integration is actually a big topic,
and it's so big that we have
a whole session on that.
And that's going to be this afternoon.
It'll show in the roadmap.
But there's an entire session
that talks about things like all
of the Mac OS X-isms that people
don't want to see that this was a
cross-platform thing that you brought
to the Mac or that you used Java.
So they want the menu bar
to be in the right place.
They want you to use the About and
the Quit of the File menu instead
of having a File Exit menu because
that's foreign to most Mac users.
So there are a lot of
little things you can do.
Now, you don't have to do them,
but we really encourage you
to do these because Mac users
are very discriminating.
And if they see the option between
something that looks like a
Mac application and something that
looks like they just downloaded it
off of freeshareware.com or something,
they're going to choose the one that
looks like a real Mac application.
But we want to let you
be able to do that.
So we have a lot of ways that you
can customize your Mac application,
your Java application,
to look just like other
Mac OS X applications.
And then there's
browser-based integration,
which means you're developing an applet,
and you want to ship it
to people through the web.
And what are all the issues when
it comes to Mac OS X browsers
and applets and applet support?
There's a lot of information on this,
and we're having a Java in the
browser session right after this one.
And there's a lot of information about,
well, we're using Aqua widgets,
so those look different in the browser.
Or we're not sure what VM exists,
because on other platforms there
could be 30 different VMs installed,
or there could be two VMs in the browser,
one shipped by the OS vendor
and one shipped by someone else.
And so we've eliminated
a lot of that complexity.
But there's still a question of, well,
I've written my HTML for one site.
How do I deal with it on the Mac?
And so this session will actually
clear up a lot of those issues.
There's also packaging
and deployment issues.
You don't want to just ship an
application as a JAR file to end users.
You could.
And JAR files,
if you don't know what they are,
they're actually the container
for Java applications.
And we have some stuff in
Mac OS X so that you can actually
just load a JAR file off the web and
double-click it and it'll launch.
And it'll just work.
It'll show up in the dock as an
application and things like that.
But it's not the ideal experience.
So there are things you can do to
package and deploy your application,
and we'll talk about that a little more.
There's also JDIRECT and JNI,
and we'll get into that more
again in the application-specific,
the tailoring application session.
But JDIRECT and JNI allow you
access to native libraries.
And JNI is the one that is
Java across all Java implementations.
JDIRECT is some things we've implemented
to make life easier for you if you
want to do native implementations,
but you don't have to use
it if you don't want to.
And then we also have the
Mac OS X Java Toolkit,
which is called the MRJ Toolkit.
And this has a lot of things for
dealing with files and dealing
with other OS-specific things.
It's Java classes that they
get to Mac-specific features.
So when we talk about deployment,
I've mentioned some of these things,
but there are three ways you can deploy.
You can deploy as an application,
which means you bundle all
of your Java-specific things
inside of an application bundle.
And so that is recognized by
the system as an application.
You have an icon.
You can do things like register for
file types and all the typical things
you'd want to do as an application.
There are also some really good
tools from Install Anywhere,
Zero-G.
They make Install Anywhere
and Power Update,
which are tools that let you create
these applications and install them.
But they also are themselves
applications that run on our platform.
So you can see things like JBuilder,
and there are a whole bunch
of applications of ThinkFree.
They bundle their applications
as a normal application,
and the only way to tell that it's
Java is to maybe look at top or
something like that or try to get a
stack trace out of it or something.
Then there's Java Web Start.
And what Java Web Start is,
is it's a technology to deploy
your applications over the web.
And this is full-fledged
applications that you're going
to put on a website somewhere.
And you just click on a link
and it downloads information
about that application.
Then it'll go download all
the jars and everything.
And then you'll have a full-fledged
application sitting on your system.
And it's a really good
deployment mechanism.
It has a lot of advantages
for things like,
if you're going to
update your application,
you just update your
jars on your website.
And when people run
their local application,
it goes and pings your website and sees,
has this jar changed?
If it has, it'll download the new jar.
And this is available on Windows, too.
So it's sort of a just universal way
to deploy applications over the web.
And then finally,
there's applets and plugins,
which applets, not surprisingly,
are the most common way
people see Java on Mac OS X,
and probably in the world.
You run your web browser,
you go to a website,
and some little thing pops
up that animates around,
and a lot of times that's in Java.
And also people have a lot of games.
If you go to Yahoo and Yahoo Games,
there's hundreds of thousands of
people playing Yahoo Games every
day online with each other.
And it's just amazing.
Those are all Java applets
that are running.
So there's just so many Java applets
that are delivered that way,
and they're easy ways to
deliver small programs,
especially because it's
just in the browser.
And on Mac OS X,
we have 1.3.1 right built in,
so you can do some
cool things in applets.
So now to show a little bit
about what you can do with
our existing Java on Mac OS X,
I'd like to bring up Tyler Stone from our
Worldwide Developer Relations Group to
show us a demo of a product called eBeam.
Tyler?
Hey, Scott.
How you doing?
Thanks.
I haven't actually done anything yet,
but thanks.
How's it going?
Not bad.
So what are you going to show us here?
I wanted to talk to you
a little bit about eBeam.
eBeam is a very fascinating product by
the folks from Electronics for Imaging,
EFI.
Screwed up their company name.
They're known for the
Fiery print process,
so a lot of you have
heard of EFI for that.
But eBeam is a new product
they've come out with.
It's a whiteboard capture
hardware and software application.
So you take this little receiver,
you attach it to any standard whiteboard.
It attaches via USB to your Macintosh.
You take any standard whiteboard pen.
If I take the clip off, you'll see that.
And you take these whiteboard pens
and you put them inside a transmitter.
Then,
any time you write on your whiteboard,
it'll actually transmit
through to your Macintosh,
like so.
So that's really cool,
but why are you showing this
at the Java overview session?
Oh, this isn't cool USB products
overview session?
No, no.
No, I'm showing it in this particular
session because the application
that you see running up here
is indeed a Java application.
We see a lot of applets,
but I'm kind of an old-fashioned
tofu and potatoes kind of guy.
I like shrink-wrapped applications.
And that's what the folks at eBeam
and EFI have done using Java.
They've created this application.
It has all the Aqua look and feel in it.
It has standard menu bars.
It has a lot of complex functionality,
and it's done almost completely in Java.
And this is running on
our existing Mac OS X?
It's available today.
You can purchase it
from the folks at eBeam.
It runs under Mac OS X, right,
X1 right now.
So what else can we do with this?
Well, of course,
you've seen us write something on here.
Of course, a whiteboard product wouldn't
be a whole lot if it didn't
have an erase function as well.
So you can go ahead and erase as well.
In fact, why don't we play a little game?
Do we have time to play a little game?
Yeah, but here's the problem.
So you work in worldwide
developer relations.
I'm actually a developer.
So we're in different buildings.
Yeah, we are.
There's like an entire gap of a
couple hundred feet between us,
I believe.
So if we wanted to actually
play this game at the office,
not here up on stage,
how would we do that?
Well, you know what?
One of the neat things about
the eBeam product is that it has
meeting functionality built into
it so that you can connect to
the eBeam application directly.
So you can connect to a meeting
that I broadcast from my
whiteboard over the Internet.
Okay.
Let's go ahead and take a look at that.
I should stay on demo machine one.
Thanks.
So what I do from any
standard whiteboard session,
so I've been writing
up on the whiteboard,
I decide I need to bring you
in via a conference call,
for instance, is I come up here and
I say share meeting.
Click on share meeting.
EFI hosts some servers that
I automatically can connect to.
I go ahead and name my meeting.
I have to stop you for a second.
I just have to say,
I know this isn't in our script,
but this is really cool.
He's going on script.
Because the cool thing about this
is this is all a swing window.
This is all native stuff going on here.
And this looks great to me.
I mean,
I see all these little touches they did,
but you wouldn't know that
this is swing running here.
So I just think that's really great.
And I wanted to comment about that.
Oh, no problem at all.
So I'm going to go ahead
and share this meeting.
I've called it the 402 session demo.
It's a pretty original name.
It goes out to the internet and
actually starts broadcasting
everything I write on the whiteboard.
So if we switch over
to demo machine 2 now.
Okay, so...
and Scott Adler:
So click on Join Meeting.
It goes out to the same server and you
should be able to join 402 Session Demo.
Okay, so this is actually live, right?
Scott Adler: This is live.
So if you guys have
eBeam on your machines,
you can join our session, too,
if you want.
If you go to www.e-beam.com and
download the software real quick,
you can join in.
[Transcript missing]
You get the pulsating default button.
I believe those are called throbbing,
actually.
Throbbing, pulsating, whatever.
You get the nice pinstripe
background automatically.
You notice the menu bar
is in the right location.
All of our drawing is
anti-alias by default.
All the text is anti-alias by default.
And so none of this-- we didn't have to
do any extra work to get these features.
Then we did do a little
bit of tweaking for OS X.
So in the Applications menu,
we do have our preference
item that actually appears and
works like it's supposed to.
And then finally,
we were able to leverage QuickTime for
Java so that this meeting that you
and Tyler have been working on so that
you can prove that you beat Tyler,
you can actually export this as
a QuickTime or digital video file
format and save that as an iMovie to
share with all your friends at Apple.
Cool.
That's great.
Well, thanks a lot.
Thanks.
So if we can go back to slides.
So the next thing I want to
talk about is a big question
that a lot of developers get.
That is, they don't really know that
much about Mac OS X specifics,
and they're big Java developers
from whatever other platforms
might be coming from.
Or the other way around.
They're Mac OS X developers,
and they don't know
what's going on in Java.
And this is the question I get,
is what do you actually
need to develop Mac OS X?
Develop applications
using Mac OS X and Java.
And the simplest answer
I can give them is
documentation.
And so to talk about that,
I'd like to bring up Bodhi Gerfen
from the technical publications group.
Well, good afternoon.
I'm Bodhi.
And as the screen says,
I work in technical publications.
I wanted to give you guys a little
bit of insight today in what
we've been doing in tech pubs,
what we plan on doing in the future,
and also for those of you that don't
know or may be new to the platform,
where you find the
technical documentation.
So to prove that, I put it on the slide.
So where are we today?
What have we done with
documentation up to this point?
Well, we saw in the Hangman demo
that MRJ is not there anymore.
MRJ was around a long time.
We saw the other day in Steve's demo.
Mac OS 9 is dead.
Well, we've been working hard to update
our documentation to Mac OS X.
Mac OS X has been out a
little over a year now.
And we've been, first of all,
working on updating our
website to bring it up to date
with what's out there today.
You'll see things on the website
today that explain some of these
little nuances that Scott's
mentioned about J2SE on Mac OS X.
We have revised the release notes format.
When Java first shipped on Mac OS X,
the release notes,
since it was so different than Mac OS 9,
had all the information in it.
Since then,
we've listened to you and we've
tried to pull things out of there.
Now the release notes are release notes.
And more than that,
we address some of your issues.
We've broken the release notes
out into individual issues that
you've had to kind of give you,
to show you what we're doing inside
Apple to make Java the best on Mac OS X.
We've updated,
we have a document on our website
that's Java development on Mac OS X.
We've updated that for Mac OS X 10.1,
Mac OS X version 10.1,
so that the examples in there,
the little tutorials, they apply to the
current version of Java.
And we've added some more Java-specific
information to the project builder help.
So if you are using project builders,
your IDE,
we have some details in there now on
how to do those little things that
might not be obvious at first glance.
So that's what we've done this past year.
Where do we want to go from here?
Well, we want to make sure that you
always have the current version
of Java doc on the system,
so that if you are
developing on your laptop,
walking around, it's all right there.
We want to work harder to integrate the
documentation with the developer tools.
Things like the class browser,
things like project builder.
If you're a Cocoa developer,
you're familiar with the fact that
you can go in and select a class,
and you can open up the documentation
right in project builder.
We're looking at things like that.
We want to see if we can
incorporate that also for you.
We're working on some more
topic-based tutorials to give you
an idea of how do I put the name of
my application up in the menu bar,
or how do I implement a quit handler,
an about handler.
Simple things for you if
you're not used to them.
We're working also on some tutorials for
beginning and more advanced developers to
walk you through some of the things that
might be a little different on Mac OS X.
And of course, this is Apple.
There's other things we have
in mind that we're scheming
about that we're working on.
So, we've seen where we are,
where we're going,
and where do you find this stuff?
Well, the best place to find it is online
at developer.apple.com/techpubs,
and there is a Java section in there.
Of course, we also give it to you
with the developer tools.
We install it when you
install the developer tools in
developer documentation Java.
So you'll find a snapshot of
what's on the web page there.
Also, the Java documentation is
available in developer help center.
If you're using project builder,
under the help menu, there's an item for
developer help center.
So if you look in there,
you'll see the Java section.
And if you want to see what's new,
of course,
check developer.apple.com/dev notes,
and that'll tell you what
we've got out there new.
So we've got some new things coming in
light of the upcoming Jaguar release,
and of course, the 1.4 release will
be real exciting too.
So thanks very much.
Scott?
Thanks.
So the rest of the time here we're
going to talk about the Java 2
Standard edition version 1.4.
And we're working on 1.4.
We want to have 1.4 available for you.
So we'll talk a little bit about what
things are in 1.4 and what things you
can take advantage of today and what
things will be coming in the future.
So in order to talk about 1.4,
we sort of have to talk about
1.3 and compare it to 1.4.
So this is 1.3,
very similar to what I showed before.
And if you look, you know,
there's a lot to it.
But when we talk about 1.4,
we can add the brand new packages here.
So these five packages are brand new.
They haven't existed before.
They've bundled in things like XML,
new IO, logging,
a lot of very new functionality
in actual whole new packages.
All of these packages have
actually changed significantly
and have had user level or
developer level APIs added to them.
So they've actually had large
changes inside of these packages.
And even more is that
all of these packages,
which is the entire Java platform,
has actually been changed
with bug fixes and updates.
There's actually,
I think someone looked at the code and
they said there's over 40% more code
in Java 1.4 than there was in 1.3.
So that's actually a big increase
because Java code is pretty big,
the amount of stuff we get from Sun.
that has new functionality
and new features.
So we'll talk a little bit
about what are the additions
to the Java 2 Standard edition.
And we grouped them into three areas.
There's the UI frameworks,
there's the enterprise frameworks,
and then there's the core frameworks.
So we're kind of going
in the reverse order.
We're going from the top down.
So if we start with the UI frameworks,
there's AWT, there's Swing,
there's Java 2D, and there's printing.
We've talked about those before.
We'll go into some
specifics on each of those.
So in AWT, some of the major changes
that have happened in there
is there's headless support,
which is if you're going to run on a
server or somewhere where you don't
actually want to draw to the screen,
if you have like a daemon
mode or something like that,
you can actually still do
AWT commands and generate images
or whatever you might need to do in
AWT without actually having a screen.
Or a screen process running.
There's full screen exclusive mode API,
and this is an interesting thing.
This is mostly designed
for game developers,
but it could be done for kiosks and
other things like that where you
actually take over the entire screen.
Now, it's interesting because we actually
have this functionality today.
If you use QuickTime for Java,
you can actually take
over the entire screen.
And if you saw the demo in our keynote
where we had that getAMP thing,
that was, I think,
using QuickTime for Java to
take over the screen.
Okay.
And this is going to be built into 1.4,
so there are going to be a lot
of people writing games and other
things that just take over the whole
user interface of the computer.
And it's really fun for
games and for kiosks,
specifically.
There's also enhanced frame support.
You have things like being able
to remove decorations from frames.
Frames in Java lingo are
Windows and things like that.
There's a lot of things you can
do for dynamic layout of frames.
There's support for a mouse wheel.
So on a Mac, if you have a mouse with a
mouse wheel that you've bought,
you can do that.
You can then use that and it'll actually
be supported in your applications.
And then there's also a
new focus architecture.
And this is actually
a big change from 1.3.
And 1.3 had some problems in focus
in that there was a different focus
architecture between AWT and Swing,
and there's also a different focus
architecture between what the platforms
have available and the different OSes.
So it got really confusing.
Like, what did activation mean?
What did moving around between your
components -- how did you manage that?
There's actually a brand
new focus architecture,
and we'll show a little bit about that.
And of course, there's a lot more.
We're not going to get
into every detail of this.
There's an entire conference
that Sun puts on that's all
about these kinds of things,
and we're just trying to give you an
overview of what things have changed.
So now I want to give you a
demo of what we were talking
about with the focus policy.
One thing I have to say with
this demo is that this is
running on a development system.
It's actually running off of
my PowerBook's hard drive.
So it's a development system that we're
working on that we're not releasing,
but it has some of the
1.4 features in it.
And we're going to show a little
bit about the focus policy.
And yeah, this is my computer.
Nobody's computer.
And so what we're looking at
here is a little demo I made
to show off how to focus it.
And I sort of stripped it down
just to show you how it's built up.
And this is just a big swing
container with a bunch of J buttons.
You kind of tell that's where
all the buttons are located.
And if I...
and David Hau.
Thank you.
So, I'm going to go ahead and show
you a little bit of the demo.
Now, that's all well and good.
You can do this on our Java stuff today,
and I actually did this
first on our 1.3.1.
But now when we went to 1.4,
we wanted to look at what does the
new focus architecture do for you.
So,
what I wanted to do is I wanted to say,
okay, I want to be able to just,
not using the mouse,
be able to tab through the
components in this view.
Now, if I were to use the focus
architecture that's built into 1.3,
and I'll actually switch
to that right now,
and if you see on the very top
here it says it's using the 1.3
layout for the focus architecture,
and I'm going to go ahead and do that.
And I'm going to go ahead and do that.
And I'm going out focus policy.
So this is the default focus policy.
And I start tabbing around by
pressing the tab button now.
It's just jumping around
randomly to whatever you,
however you added your
components to this thing.
Now, that's okay if you want to just,
you know, try to hunt and peck,
but if I switch to the
focus policy in 1.4,
I've actually implemented a
focus policy that follows all the
components through the tour itinerary.
So if I tab through
You can do this,
you can see it follows through
the whole itinerary of the tour.
And we actually have some
things just for fun here.
You can see the itinerary
and see the tour.
Now, you're probably saying, well,
we can do this in 1.3.
Yeah, you can do this really easily in
1.3 if you have one itinerary.
But if you have multiple
itineraries here,
so if I switch to another itinerary,
now we've just changed the focus policy
to the new itinerary's focus policy.
So without actually changing
anything except telling our focus
policy object we've got a new object
in there that is our itinerary,
we now can follow this.
this itinerary through.
and David We can also, you know,
we can have a whole bunch of other
tours and jump through those.
So this is, again,
this is not a groundbreaking feature
in terms of you could somehow spoof
this same feature by building a
whole bunch of code and do this.
And, you know, but this,
in this code we actually just
implement a focus policy,
apply it to that object and
it just follows all the focus.
And for accessibility this is
really important because if you
want to let people actually use
this stuff in a meaningful way,
they have to be able to tab to
the different items and then press
the space bar and use the item
and interact with these components
without actually using the mouse.
And if there's some defined way
that you're supposed to navigate
through things and if that
actually dynamically changes,
this kind of focus policy
will help out a lot.
So if we can go back to the slides.
So the next thing we're
gonna talk about is Swing.
And Swing has had some,
some additions to it.
The most notable are the
indeterminate progress bars.
The JSpinner,
which lets you do things like
make date changers really easily,
just a little up and down arrow.
Scrollable JTab panes.
So if you--right now if you
have JTab panes and you add
lots of elements to them,
they just start stacking up,
and it's not very good looking.
It actually doesn't follow
the Aqua HI guidelines.
So the new scrollable JTab panes are
useful if you have to have lots of tabs.
And for some reason,
a lot of people like tabs
and like tons of tabs.
So this helps out with that.
I recommend you don't use tons of tabs,
but if you do,
you can use the scrollable JTab pane.
There's also a JFormatted text field,
which lets you handle things like
formatting dates and other-- just any
object you can build formatters for
and put right into this text field.
There's also a new
drag-and-drop architecture,
which we'll talk about more in the
tailoring the application session.
So in Java 2D,
if you went to the graphics session,
you heard a lot about this.
In Java 2D, there's actually an entirely
new pipeline architecture.
There's a really cool thing that's been
added called hardware acceleration.
It's called volatile images and
it lets you hardware accelerate
your off-screen images.
So if you're trying to pull
images off-screen and then just
splitting them up to the screen,
you can actually use the graphics card
and hardware accelerate this stuff.
There's a whole new image I/O framework
which is for pluggable images
so you can build your own image
encoders and decoders and they
just plug right into the system.
So if you decide to come out
with brand new image format X,
you can just add yours
into the image I/O format.
And there's support
for bidirectional text.
So if you're using things like
Arabic or Hebrew that have to go
right to left and then sometimes
you throw in an English thing
that has to go left to right,
it's really confusing if you have
to write that support yourself
and this is taken care of for you.
And there's a whole lot
more inside of Java 2D.
Printing has had some major changes.
There's some new things for
printer device discovery.
It lets you find printers and
find information about them.
There's actually an
extensible printing API,
so you can add custom
things to the print service.
And then if you actually are a
service provider of printing services,
you can actually add new
functionality using just this
plug-in API that's built in there.
So now we're getting towards the
web and enterprise frameworks.
There's actually a whole bunch of
things that are going on in here.
And this is--there's a session on this,
which is our web services session that's
going to talk about some of these things.
XML processing is actually a useful
feature that they've bundled in
of extensions of XML processing.
It's some basic XML features.
It handles your XSL,
your different kinds of
DTDs and things like that,
all the stuff that goes into XML.
It's got some basic functionality.
And you can actually see on
SunSite all the specs for what
their XML processing involves.
The really good thing about this is that
you know you have at least some base
functionality built into the 1.4 JDK.
So you don't have to count on
bundling another XML parser or
whatever you might be using XML for.
You at least know
there's a known quantity.
And if you have something
that you need to do specific,
you can always bundle your own.
But this is just a known quantity
that they're bundling inside.
There's JDBC 3.0,
and I actually have some notes on this.
I actually have some notes
on some of these things,
because I can't remember everything.
But there's things in
JDBC 3.0 like save points,
keeping your result sets open,
better access to your metadata,
getting automatically generated keys.
Inside of the JNDI,
there's access to your
domain name servers.
There's LDAP access,
support for Corba object services.
And then RMI has a bunch of enhancements.
RMI,
you can get server-side stack traces.
So if you've ever tried
to do RMI applications,
one of the hardest things to do is to
get your information of what's going
on on the server onto your client side
so that you can actually dump those
to a console or something equivalent
so you can see what's going on on the
server without having to find that
server or remotely log into that server,
find the console dump of that server,
so you can actually get
those stack traces back.
RMI over IIOP lets you use Corba
servers instead of RMI APIs.
So you can use RMI APIs to get to IIOP.
And then let's go on to the next section.
which is the core VM features.
Now, the core VM features
are really interesting.
There's gonna be an
entire session about this,
which is 406, the Java VM internals,
where we're gonna talk about all the 1.4
features that are inside of the core VM.
But some of these that are highlights
for you to see are improved debugging,
which the biggest thing here
is the full-speed debugging
that we mentioned later,
and Blaine will talk a lot about
what's actually improved in here.
Assertions are something that developers
have been asking for for a long time,
and they'll be available in 1.4.
Chained exceptions.
If you've been doing any coding
where you actually have some sort
of factored-out framework below you,
and it throws exceptions,
you catch those things,
and you want to re-throw
them as your own exception,
you can bundle those
exceptions inside of it.
And it's things you sort
of could do in 1.3 before,
but this has a structured way for doing
it so that you can actually get your
chained description of exceptions.
And I like to refer back to
what James Gosling was saying.
It's one of those great things
about Java is that when things fail,
they usually fail gracefully,
and they usually tell
you why they failed.
And this is getting you more
information about why this has failed.
You want to see, you know,
not only did you get some
array out-of-bounds thing,
it was caused because you had some
network error below it that was thrown,
and you caught it somewhere,
or something like that.
And then there's things like
hot-swap code substitution,
which Blaine will tell you all about.
I really don't know even what that is,
but it's some cool stuff.
So also inside of the core frameworks,
there's new I/O APIs,
which that has to do with
actually getting access to
the data buffer of the images.
There's a whole bunch of things
going on in these I/O APIs,
so you can actually get access to
almost anything that you need I/O.
It has faster access,
has direct native access,
and as was explained in this
morning's graphics talk,
is getting really close to C speed
on a lot of these I/O things.
There's a whole preferences API that
lets you take care of multiple
users in terms of preferences.
So you can--it's really
good for Mac OS X.
I mean, you have multiple users on
Mac OS X out of the box,
and this preferences API lets
you take care of that.
There's a logging API that is useful.
If you start using some of the things
in the Internet plugin that we'll
talk in in the browser section,
there's whole ways to view
this logging information.
You can also log it to special
areas and things like that.
And then there's IPv6 support,
which is going to be a
little bit more advanced,
but it's going to be really
important because we're
running out of IP addresses,
and everyone's dealing with that.
So IPv6 and those things are going to
be big things that your applications are
going to want to take advantage of so
that when everything starts changing,
it just all works.
So with that,
I'd like to bring up Victor Hernandez,
who's our Java Runtime Engineering lead,
and he has been working on some of
the new I/O stuff and is going to give
us a little demo of what that can do.
There we go.
Hello.
I'm here to show you the benefits
of using one of the most exciting
features that's available in JDK 1.4.
That feature is new I/O.
So what exactly is new I/O?
New I/O is the ability to allocate
and directly reference memory that's
allocated in the native heap from Java.
Previously,
you couldn't do this directly from Java,
and coming in 1.4,
you will have the ability to do so.
This will incredibly improve the
performance of any operation that
requires access to native memory,
such as file access, sockets.
And I'm going to show you a quick demo
of how it'll improve the-- you can even
improve the performance of the Java 1.4.
So let's get started.
of your graphics.
So what I have here is a flight
simulator written by Ken Russell,
who is a hotspot VM engineer over at Sun.
And it's a real-time rendering engine.
So what we have right here is
just a huge set of data points.
And right now,
I'm basically going to try to go
up and get it to come back down and
show you the graphics performance.
So if I go up, there we go.
I'm not very good at flying airplanes.
All right, so as you see right now,
this is rendering under JDK 1.3.
You see the choppiness in general.
And if we go over to 1.4...
It's smooth.
Pretty straightforward.
Basically,
what we're moving over here is a
lot of overhead of copies of the
native memory buffers back and forth
between the heap and the native heap.
So where can you go to
find out more about this?
Come on Friday morning to
the Java Performance Session,
and you'll find out how to make
your app look like that instead.
Great.
Thanks.
Thanks a lot.
So actually they showed me that demo
last week when they got it working,
and it was actually running a lot faster
on our machines back at the office,
but it was going between, like,
30 frames a second and, like,
160 or something crazy like that.
And you couldn't see a difference.
So I actually told them to
slow it down for this session,
put a lot more data in there.
So it's kind of cool.
That's one of the reasons
why when it comes up,
it looks really choppy,
'cause there's actually a lot
of information in that data
that they're showing there.
It's real terrain information
from the Grand Canyon.
So there's a lot going on there.
And it's kind of cool to see
the difference in speed between
actually using the native buffers
and uploading all that information.
So security has had a lot of changes,
and it's really important to
us to make sure that we keep up
with all these security changes
because security is huge.
So some of the things we have here
are the Java Secure Sockets extension.
Now, that's bundled into 1.4.
It was an extension in 1.3,
and we shipped it in 1.3.
So you get this right now.
And that's all of your
HTTPS kind of connections that
are automatically authenticated,
and it just happens.
There's the Java Cryptography
extension that uses the
message authentication code.
It lets you take care of
things like if you're talking
over an insecure connection,
you can have some authentication key
that is used to make sure that you're
actually sending secure packets.
There's the authentication
and authorization services,
the GSS API,
which is for Kerberos support,
so you don't send your
passwords over the network,
and you have just a single sign-up.
You can sign on for each domain.
Then there's the Java Certification
Path API that lets you build up
certificate chains and things.
So there's a lot of information
about all this on Sun's website,
so you can check out more
details about this there,
too.
So that's sort of a high-level overview
of what are things that are new in 1.4.
Now going
With 1.4 development,
we're actually adding things
in for 1.4 that will allow you
to have multiple JDK support.
Now, I'm very specific here
by saying JDK support,
and that is because we're setting
this up for you as developers to have
multiple JDKs on your machine and
be able to switch back and forth.
Because you as developers,
you know what's best for you and you
know how to switch things around.
We're trying to figure out exactly
what we should do for end users and
to make sure that we give them the
best experience because we don't
want their applications to break as
soon as we give them a 1.4 system.
So we really need your feedback
on this and what would make sense.
For details,
Blaine has a lot more information on the
details of how this is going to happen
and how we might do things in the future.
So definitely go to the 4.06 session.
and as Ted announced yesterday,
we have the Java 1.4 Developer Preview.
It's available right now.
You can go get it.
You can try it out.
We encourage you to do it.
Remember, it's a developer preview.
It only runs on Jaguar.
and the question we keep getting and we
have to remind everybody what's in it,
it's got the Hotspot Client VM,
it's got the 131 GUI frameworks,
but everything else inside of it is 1.4.
So if you think about it,
it's what I just showed,
there's the first section I talked about,
Swing and AWT,
most of that is 1.3.1 still.
So we don't have those features yet,
but everything else,
all the chained exceptions,
the assertions and all
those things are 1.4.
The new IO, which is running there,
that was running with GL for Java.
So a lot of functionality is
there and you can do things
like all of your web services,
you can definitely do on
this developer preview.
So hopefully you'll check that out
and you'll get your feedback to us
on what things we're doing well.
and definitely go to session
406 for more details.
So in summary,
what we've gone through today
We know that the Java 2 platform
is included in Mac OS X.
It's in every box.
Java 1.3.1 is what's on there now.
You can develop real
applications we saw with eBeam.
They have a real application that ships
with a $600 piece of hardware and that's
their free application that runs with it.
It's all written in Java and
users don't know that.
It just works.
1.4 is coming.
You got the developer preview.
We've talked about that.
and then the roadmap.
I've talked about this a lot,
but just so you know
where the sessions are.
403, Java in the Browser,
is immediately after this in Room C,
right over here.
We'll talk about applets,
we'll talk about Web Start,
we'll show you some things about
different browsers and what you have
to worry about as an applet developer.
Then 404 is tailoring
Java applications for Mac OS X.
This is key for anyone who's
delivering applications on Mac OS X.
You want to make sure that
everything looks good,
everything feels like
a regular application.
And we're going to have all
of our DTS engineers there.
I'm going to show a couple
little things there,
so it'll be fun.
Java Web Services is tomorrow.
And this is an overview, again,
of all the things you can do as
web services in Java using XML.
So we saw a lot of web services
things being demoed in Sherlock and
other places in the keynote,
the opening keynote.
And most of these web services,
or a lot of these web services,
are being run on Java servers,
things that are running just regularly,
their J2EE or SE servers,
running servlets,
providing ways to get to your
web services through Java.
There's just a huge family
of the Java family that is
supporting these kinds of things.
And then there's the 406,
which we've talked about a lot,
is the Java Virtual Machine Internals.
You can see a little bit
under the hood there.
And then 407, which is Victor's session,
is Java Performance,
talking about making your
applications faster and taking
advantage of our new 1.4 features.
And then, of course,
the QuickTime for Java.
We don't talk about that a lot
because it really just works.
You want QuickTime stuff
inside of your Java.
You just start using QuickTime for Java,
just like Matt talked about
with the E-Beam things.
They found out about QuickTime for Java.
They saw that they could export DV,
they could export QuickTime movies,
and so they just turned these sessions
that have all this vector-based
drawing into little QuickTime movies.
And you can see exactly
the way people draw.
And then, of course,
there's the QuickTime for Java.
You can see exactly the way people
drew it on screen and things.
So it's a really good technology.
It's available for Mac and for Windows.
So for most of the cross-platform needs,
you can use it to do lots of
things that just are not built
into the Java platform itself.
And then, of course, WebObjects.
WebObjects uses Java for
almost everything.
So check them out.
They have great server solutions.
They have this client-side Java that all
uses swing applications on the client.
So it's--and they are in room A1.
They own that room.
And they're in room A1.
So if you want to go see them,
go to room A1.
And it's all week over there.
We also have the Java compatibility lab,
which is down in room L.
So that's down the stairs back to the
front of the session--front of the hall.
And if you go down there,
we actually have at least one or
two Java engineers from our team
who can help you with any of your
issues with your applications.
If you have any questions on things
or want to just see how an application
that you have written runs on Java,
go down there and see what we have.
Go down there, talk to them.
They'll answer any of your questions.
And that's all week in room L.
And, of course, our links and resources.
We've got all the
documentation we talked about.
Java dev mailing list hasn't
been talked about that much,
but it's a really good resource
for anyone who's developing
Java on the Macintosh.
We watch that mailing list ourselves.
Our DTS engineers watch
that mailing list.
We answer questions as much as we can.
Other developers answer questions,
oftentimes better than we do.
So it's a really good resource.
You can just--you can just go
down there and talk to them.
And just send your questions there.
There's anything ranging from
simple newbie questions to how do
I do an about handler to--or how
do I do basic Java stuff to I'm
trying to do this stuff with JNI,
how exactly do I do it,
and someone will pipe
up and say I tried this,
I tried this.
So it's a really good developer forum.
And then, of course,
when you have real questions that have
to be answered by Apple employees,
contact DTS.
Both Matt--Matt Drance and
Ted Jusvick are DTS engineers,
and they're absolutely excellent.
They--so call them--I mean,
send them email,
and they'll fix your problems, hopefully.
and the final thing is who to contact
about everything else and who we're
going to bring up now is Alan Samuel.
He's our evangelist for Java.
He is otherwise known as "The Man."
and he is the one to contact.
Do you have any issues with Java?
Anything outside the realm of
technically how do we do this?
Talk to Alan.